Inception of the Special Collections

Thomas Jefferson reserved the principal room of the most splendid building of his aca-
demical village, the Rotunda, for the library. Aral upon the completion of the Rotunda
in 1826, che 8,000 volumes it contained ranked the University’s library near the top
among American instirucions of higher learning. For his own library and for the
University, Jefferson sought books of the highest quality with the best texts and empha-
sized the collection of original manuscripss. “The letters of a person,” he wrote, “form
the only full ane genuine journal of his life.”

The letter in which he made this statement, the lists of books he selected, and many
of the books themselves are in che Universicy Library voday coagether wath his architec-
tural drawings, the minutes thar he kepe for the Board of Visitors, and thousands of
other letters and documents about the creation of the University. From these auspicious
beginnings the Special Collections Department grew.

Fram the 19th-century foundation

James Madison, the University’s secand Rector, established the first endowment fund for
the purchase of materials for the library through a bequest in his will in 1836. Ever since,
alumni and friends of the University have designated gifts for the purchase of rare books
and manuscripts. The Alfred Heary Byrd, Elizabeth Cocke Coles, and John H. Cocke
endowed funds, each used for the purchase of books and manuscripts relating to
Virginia, and the unrestricted Douglas Hamilton Gordon and Bennett Wood Green
funds, are the oldest of these.

The renowned Lee Family of Virginia placed its papers, rich sources of colonial and
revolutionary hissory, in the library sometime before 1832. Over the nexe 160 years,
many other families followed suit, including the Randolphs, Berkeleys, Cockes, Cabells,
Carrs, Bryans, Tuckers, and Harrisons. Today, the papers of Virginia families are the
cornerstone of the department's manuscript collections and are rich sources for a great
variety of historical and other studies. Notable political collections include the papers of
U.S. congressmen and cabinet officers, such as senators Carter Glass and Harry E Byrd,
Sr. and Jr., and Secretary of Stare Edward Stettinius. Other manuscript holdings are
domestic, economic, literary, religious, agricultural, and educational in nature, and
include a variety of formats ranging from manuscripts and typescripts of letters, diaries,
account books, and memoranda to computer files and printouts.